Team Project 2
================
Abizer and Luis
11/19/2022

In this project, we used the training data set to create a model that
predicts the county- level winner of the 2016 Presidential Election. The
winner of each county is classified as Democrat (Clinton) and Republican
(Rep)

We were concerned that there would be NA values in the “winner16”
variable. To remove the NAs, we created a new variable called “winner”
that omits the NA values. “Winner” variable is classified as Democrat if
the actual winner is “Dem” and Republican if the actual winner is “Rep”.
For example, some of the winner variable values are shown below

    [1] Republican Republican Republican Republican Democrat   Republican
    Levels: Democrat Republican

The fun part was deciding the variables we wanted to use in order to
create our model. We ran a regression analysis with the 51 predictor
variables and deciphered that 17 of them were significant. We were also
concerned that some of these variables might be correlated to each other
which might be affecting their significance level. To examine this, we
ran a individual regression analysis for each variable against the
winner variable and chose the ones that were still significant. After
doing this procedure, we concluded that retail sales, income/capita,
median house value, percentage of population living in multi unit
housing, languages other English spoken at home, percentage of
population who have completed undergraduate degree or higher, percentage
of population living in same housing for multiple years and percentage
change in population, Persons/Household, Land Area, Non-Employer
Establishments, Hispanic Owned Firms, Accommodation/Food Sales and
Building Permits are significant.

    Warning: glm.fit: fitted probabilities numerically 0 or 1 occurred

    Call:
    glm(formula = myform, family = binomial, data = train_final)

    Deviance Residuals: 
        Min       1Q   Median       3Q      Max  
    -3.1030   0.1233   0.2278   0.3712   3.3573  

    Coefficients:
                                                  Estimate Std. Error z value
    (Intercept)                                  1.252e+01  2.134e+00   5.867
    Retail_Sales_07                              6.890e-08  1.117e-07   0.617
    Income_per_capita                            3.748e-04  3.394e-05  11.042
    Median_house_value                          -1.434e-05  1.946e-06  -7.369
    Percent_multi_unit_housing                  -1.032e-01  1.380e-02  -7.482
    Spoken_non_english_lang                     -3.329e-02  9.749e-03  -3.414
    Percent_Undergrad                           -2.020e-01  1.805e-02 -11.191
    Percent_living_in_same_house_multiple_years -1.113e-01  2.302e-02  -4.837
    percent_change_in_pop                        1.957e-01  2.870e-02   6.821
    Persons_per_Household                       -6.610e-01  4.212e-01  -1.569
    Land_Area                                    2.457e-04  6.419e-05   3.828
    Nonemployer_establishments                  -2.377e-06  2.296e-05  -0.104
    Hispanic_firms                              -5.422e-02  1.551e-02  -3.497
    Accomodation_Food_Sales                     -1.996e-06  6.223e-07  -3.207
    Building_Permits                             2.777e-04  1.219e-04   2.279
                                                Pr(>|z|)    
    (Intercept)                                 4.45e-09 ***
    Retail_Sales_07                             0.537480    
    Income_per_capita                            < 2e-16 ***
    Median_house_value                          1.72e-13 ***
    Percent_multi_unit_housing                  7.33e-14 ***
    Spoken_non_english_lang                     0.000639 ***
    Percent_Undergrad                            < 2e-16 ***
    Percent_living_in_same_house_multiple_years 1.32e-06 ***
    percent_change_in_pop                       9.06e-12 ***
    Persons_per_Household                       0.116558    
    Land_Area                                   0.000129 ***
    Nonemployer_establishments                  0.917516    
    Hispanic_firms                              0.000471 ***
    Accomodation_Food_Sales                     0.001340 ** 
    Building_Permits                            0.022670 *  
    ---
    Signif. codes:  0 '***' 0.001 '**' 0.01 '*' 0.05 '.' 0.1 ' ' 1

    (Dispersion parameter for binomial family taken to be 1)

        Null deviance: 2120.3  on 2488  degrees of freedom
    Residual deviance: 1142.5  on 2474  degrees of freedom
    AIC: 1172.5

    Number of Fisher Scoring iterations: 7

We then fit the model “winner.glm” into the train and test data to
create probabilities. We then set a threshold of 0.05. For example, if
the model determines the probability to be 0.1, prediction will be
Republican or else Democrat. Then, we created a double density curve

![](LAProject2_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)<!-- -->

The double density curve indicates that most Republicans have an
estimated probability of winning around 90%. Probability of Democrats
winning is not defined so well but range lower than a Republican

Here, we created a ROC curve for the training data

    Warning: `data_frame()` was deprecated in tibble 1.1.0.
    Please use `tibble()` instead.
    This warning is displayed once every 8 hours.
    Call `lifecycle::last_lifecycle_warnings()` to see where this warning was generated.

![](LAProject2_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png)<!-- -->

The ROC curve shows the true positive and false positive rate of our
model. ROC curve suggests that our model is very good because it is
close to a right angled triangle and has a higher sensitivity than a
random classifier.

We then calculated the accuracy, precision and recall and the error of
the model using a 5-fold cross validation and a 0.05 threshold

       accuracy precision    recall
    1 0.8830856 0.8797997 0.9985789
    Warning: glm.fit: fitted probabilities numerically 0 or 1 occurred

    Warning: glm.fit: fitted probabilities numerically 0 or 1 occurred

    Warning: glm.fit: fitted probabilities numerically 0 or 1 occurred

    Warning: glm.fit: fitted probabilities numerically 0 or 1 occurred

    Warning: glm.fit: fitted probabilities numerically 0 or 1 occurred
    [1] 0.119325

The accuracy for the logistic regression model is 0.883 The error is
0.119

Random Forest

We then created a random forest model called winner_rforest with 350
trees that randomly select out of 5 variables at each split. To choose
the number of bootstrapped trees and the number of predictors to
randomly select, we tried numbers around 350 and 5 respectively. We
noticed that the accuracy goes down if we input more/less predictors or
more/less trees hence we decided to stick with 350 trees and 5
predictors to randomly select. Then we fitted the model to the training
data, and calculated the accuracy, precision, recall and error for the
training data predictions.


    Call:
     randomForest(formula = myform, data = train_final, ntree = 350,      mtry = 5) 
                   Type of random forest: classification
                         Number of trees: 350
    No. of variables tried at each split: 5

            OOB estimate of  error rate: 8.6%
    Confusion matrix:
               Democrat Republican class.error
    Democrat        225        153  0.40476190
    Republican       61       2050  0.02889626
       accuracy precision    recall     error
    1 0.9140217 0.9305493 0.9711037 0.0859783

Our accuracy was 0.91 and error was 0.09.

After running the two models, it was clear that the random forest model
gave us the highest accuracy of 0.91 and lowest error of 0.09 so we went
ahead with that model for our predictions.
